[Music]
so first off great I love this room it's
super good yeah this is the library yeah
this is a nice quiet space yeah very
good yeah well I do either way I'm
joined today by Steven Mortimer who is a
senior game designer at Riot Games
thanks so much for joining me no problem
glad to be here so talk to me a little
bit what exactly is it that you do at
write people here designer and they
probably think champion designer right
yeah so pretty much anything outside of
the game I try to get involved in and
help make better so this could be things
like the leveling the missions the
events all the way to you know various
parts of loot things like that and just
trying to be familiar with everything on
League and how can i how can we make it
better so it's like sort of the
experience outside of the matches
themselves yeah I mean we've got a
really good team that's handling the
core game but anything outside the core
game that's where I get to help step in
and try to make that experience better
can you give me an example maybe of like
a direct thing that people would be
familiar with it you yeah I mean one of
the biggest things I'm proud of was the
level cap you know when I first got to
riot it was sort of like cool when we
want to add some stuff for players to
earn and feel good and it was like man
as a player I've been stuck at level 30
for seven years I'd kind of like to fix
that and what was cool about being a
riot was they were like okay sounds
great go for it and so you know went
through all the work and now players can
level up I personally just hit level 100
yesterday so yeah stuff like that
gratulations on the achievement thank
you okay the site losing four games so
what's interesting to me about that is
that it doesn't sound like there was a
sort of like directive that was handed
down from on high like we need to change
the level cap this is something where
you're able to kind of just identify
something that you would like to see
different and pitch it right yeah and
that's one of the big things I like
about riot is that if you've got a sort
of a goal that helps support another
goal in this case it was rooms we were
launching runes reforged and they were
like oh we really need to balance the
economy and now might be a good time to
address that anyone have any cool
thoughts that was where you could swoop
in and kind of go like well wouldn't it
be great if we allowed players who might
be losing some games or
stuck in the same spot and ranked but
still make progress another way and show
off like how much they've been playing
and so that was sort of a cool solution
that everyone was like yeah that sounds
great
tired of being little 30 so how how long
have you been a tramp almost two years
now all right and where were you before
before that I was at Nintendo for 11
years 11 years 11 years yeah were you a
designer the whole time you were there I
was I started off as an intern making
$10 an hour making levels for a DS title
and then worked my way all the way up to
where the last two titles I was actually
the director of the team I got to be the
first name in the credits of one of
those cool moments and they don't even
have credits here unfortunately it's
true it's true I just get to tweet out
that I shipped something and that's
about it
yeah and into the Twitter void that's
right people people right get one or two
likes hopefully one of them is not your
mom yeah that's good that's good so 11
years so how did you cuz you started off
as an intern so did you like it's
interesting cuz a lot of people I think
want like the idea of like becoming a
game designer but don't really know what
that path it's like like did you go to
college for game design like how did it
all come about yeah so I definitely I
was one of those standard kids that like
always wanted to be a game designer
played game since I was five stuff like
that actually went to University of
Washington for a year and was like this
isn't gonna get me there so dropped out
and then applied to DigiPen which is a
gaming school but at the time they
didn't have a video game design degree
it was only engineering an art and I'm
like well I don't really want to be an
engineer but this is my way in so I'm
just gonna stomach through it and
honestly I wasn't that great a student
but a lot of other students helped me
through it and got through and my
sophomore year there was Nintendo had a
job opening for this internship but it
was for juniors and seniors only and I'm
like no you you've gotta let me try this
and so I actually went into the
administration office was like please
I'm begging you've got to let me try it
alright you can try not gonna promise
anything went through the interview
process became one of the final five
they had a level design test nailed that
and then got the job and so my junior
and
your year I was working at Nintendo what
was working at Nintendo like not what
you would expect it's interesting
because I said I went to DigiPen and
they teach you various things about how
to make games how to create like game
design documents and within like the
first two days at Nintendo it's like
yeah yeah none of that this is how we do
things that's kind of but that feels
like how college is for everyone right
yes
any time you study something like you
end up experiencing like a completely
different world yeah whatever you yeah
the big one that caught me off guard at
first was like digit hem was teaching
you all about like making a game design
document and making sure everything is
planned out before you get started and
then you show up at Nintendo and they're
like no we just try to like make
something fun and once we have that then
we start building around that and until
we have something fun a big documents
not how you find fun yeah it was just
like whoa mind blowing so 11 years so
like what what are some of the projects
that you can talk about that you worked
on there yeah so I shipped eight titles
while I was there six of them are from
the Mario vs. Donkey Kong series which
is basically a puzzle game where you
play these little toy Mario characters
and try to get them to the to the goal
so a lot of puzzle games there was a
small game called aura or a climber that
very few people have ever heard of and
then a crosswords game where I learned
more about crossword puzzles than I ever
wanted to know after being there for
over a decade I imagine it was probably
a difficult decision to decide you know
you're gonna movie especially because
Nintendo up in Washington here we got
right in LA so what was kind of that
experience like for you it was
challenging for sure call me
old-fashioned but I'm definitely like
you go to one company and you you work
hard and stay there a long time I
definitely had been attached to the
company but as I said I got to be the
director of sort of the last two titles
and it was sort of looking like okay
well the next project you'll be the
director of another puzzle game and
another puzzle game because Nintendo can
oftentimes play it safe like that and
sort of like cool you're really good at
that keep doing it but for me as a
designer I needed to kind of prove I
could get better at other things and try
other projects other type of games and
so sort of a hard decision actually only
applied to one other company which was
riot otherwise I probably would have
just stayed at Nintendo but after I'd
accepted and so
decided to make that leap and admittedly
it's like I'm sort of lacking confidence
at the time because it's like can I
really do something else and by coming
here and I think I've been doing pretty
well so far so trying to prove that yeah
I can do other things okay I'm sure you
had in your mind this vision of riot
whenever you apply it and whenever you
accept it now you've been here for two
years and I'm kind of curious like how
does the past two years like compared to
sort of the impressions that you had
especially given that your background
was somewhat limited to one company yeah
that was the only perspective you had
yeah absolutely uh it's funny when
people first come to riot and other
companies as well you kind of have this
imposter syndrome where it's like man
everyone else around here is like so
much smarter than I am
one of the silliest things I struggled
with for a long time was like a lot of
our designers here will talk a lot and
use big words and I came from a Japanese
company where you have to often speak
through translation and so you have to
use very short simple words and so I was
just like trying to keep up with these
conversations and it was intimidating
say yeah like said and impostor syndrome
kicks in you're like am I actually even
good enough to be here over time I've
sort of found that no actually you are
pretty good at your job and so you've
been able to sort of expand on what you
can do and admittedly I'm pretty
surprised how much I've been able to do
here I was expecting to have to sort of
work my way up a little bit more before
I get to do anything cool and instead
I've got to do a lot of cool things in a
very short amount of time yeah it was it
hard switching from an environment that
was like much more structured and as you
said maybe top down to something where
it's just like it is still a little
crazy to me that you're able to sort of
say like well Liga Legends has a had a
level cap for its whole existence
everybody talks about hitting level 30
and let's just throw that out and you
know you got sounds like you got buy-in
pretty quickly yeah surprisingly so I'd
say it was definitely an adjustment I
just sort of went in with a strategy of
treating everyone like I would almost at
Nintendo where it's like okay assume
anyone might be some my superior talked
to them very humble like what about this
idea versus sort of the boastful like my
idea is great you've got to listen to it
and that strategy has tended to work
well people are much more willing to
listen when you're like oh here's a
idea and if you reject it no biggie yeah
you know try another idea come up with
other stuff have you had any big
setbacks while you were here nothing too
crazy probably the most interesting
setback when with releasing the level
cap I learned that change aversion
should not be underestimated and what I
mean by that is players were so used to
IP and the way things used to be that we
release this new system that is better
and mathematically we proved many times
that like we're giving you more free
stuff players were still just like this
is terrible this is awful and that first
like week of player reaction was like
scary it was like oh my god they don't
love it I was in rooms for ten hours a
day just like really beating up like
what do we do about this how do we make
this better and we made a couple minor
adjustments and over time we sort of
ended up being right where it's like now
whenever someone's like oh this new
system is unfair many players speak up
they're like no it's not it's been
proven it's great shut up which is
gratifying but at the time it was like
scary cuz you know mine and many other
writers goals is to just like make
really cool stuff the players like and
when they don't it's like oh yeah I was
gonna say cuz it must be really hard
like I've worked on projects before
where I'm like so proud of it right like
it it means so much I've spent so much
time on it and then I might release it
in the community feedback is is rough
right it's kind of a weird gig where
you're the feedback is so instantaneous
and and because it's somewhat anonymous
like a lot of people like you probably
released this thing everybody you're
excited to release it it's shipped like
it's for so much we work and then you go
online and people are like this thing
sucks right it's cheap they're trying to
like make us pay more why are they
ripping us off yeah there's a whole
bunch to that too right cuz like often
times some of the complaints are like a
lack of understanding or like maybe they
don't we didn't publish it right like
why does this work the way it does in
leveling' x' case a lot of people were
focused on like level 150 to 175 is
really really slow and it's like well
yeah but most of you aren't gonna hit
that ever in your entire life and and
even then we fixed it after the fact
but then there's just the like the
personal side of it where like we're on
Twitter reddit boards you know you name
it it's like every single comment you
almost have to learn as a developer not
to take those personally and not to like
over scrutinize on each one and instead
look at them of high level of just like
okay players overall seem to be okay
there's a few people that aren't how can
I make it better from that point on but
it can definitely defeat a person to see
a lot of that it's a skill you have to
build up have you had those days where
cuz you mentioned you have a long
commute mm-hm I imagine you come here
you use you work like long hours on
something that releases and then you go
online you see people just say it sucks
like that must be a tough ride home yeah
I mean thankfully I've been blessed that
most of the stuff I've released hasn't
been too bad probably the most infamous
thing I've done was there was a mission
in the world's event last year and the
mission was you had to win a game with
infinity-edge win a game with randuin's
omen and win a game with mirela nomicon
basically the goal of the mission was
like play three different types of
champion right what ended up happening
was players would like by all three in
one game and ruin the game or they would
right before they were about to win
towerdive killed themselves and tried to
buy them all in the shop and you would
get games where all five players did
that and then they lose the game because
they did that and you're just going oh
my god but that's like it mistake on
your end yeah that was totally my bad
unlike the other situation where you say
like well we know this is better about
like just right communicated this was
just like a my bad yeah you know and
thankfully I handled it as best I could
which was like I were in on boards and
red it was like yep this is a terrible
mission we'll never do this again made
sure that you know we took that learning
to heart and it's a small thing it's
just like a single mission but like even
a small thing like that like you take
super personally it's like how can I get
better how can I make sure that never
happens again do you play a lot of
League of Legends I did hit level 100
okay that's true that's really that is
significant yeah do you play games
outside of league yeah quite a bit
admittedly less so right now because I'm
working way too much okay but
something players will hopefully really
really like very soon maybe after the
first couple of days of being very
frustrated this time I'm hoping they'll
just love it okay it's a it's a doozy
it'll be good we'll still see it's it's
eating a lot of my time though but you
so but you will do because there are I
know some people who are just like they
get so into one game and I can imagine
working in it like right where you're
like the focus is so much on this one
game at least publicly like it I could
see it just sort of consuming but it
sounds like you play other titles as
well yeah I mean the thing is as a
designer you really need to understand a
lot of the other games out there and
it's not just like what's fun and what's
not but it's also so you don't end up
reinventing the wheel you know if you
need to come up with a new UI scheme for
a various menu it's like knowing that
there's 500,000 different menus out
there you can sort of pull on that
knowledge and go like oh well there was
this one that worked really well we can
do something similar to that because
again like so many games over the last
30 years a lot of problems have been
solved and that was something actually
learned at Nintendo because one of their
big things was like you come up with a
core concept for a game
let's do splatoon as example right like
it's all about painting and you know
painting the ground to try to win the
game once you have that building the
game around it is actually a very solved
problem it's like it needs menus it
needs levels it needs boss bell you know
like this is all been done before what
what are some of your what are the some
of the big titles that have influenced
you as a designer over the years so the
top three I always go back to from like
a kid was like Super Metroid and Chrono
Trigger and Smash Brothers those are the
big three and then once I sort of hit
college it became like Starcraft for a
little while
world of warcraft i was a raid leader
for a long time played that like seven
eight years transitioned into league
diablo three i still play every once in
a while just recently did a hardcore
character to Paragon 200 and then the
other fun thing I did was when I first
got to riot I wasn't quite as busy so I
needed a way to kind of like force
myself to play some new games and learn
I actually did a YouTube channel for a
short while called like first 30 of
gaming where I would play a game for 30
minutes
and then just judge its design based
solely on 3030 and there are some really
good games that have some really
terrible first 30s where it's like
you're watching cutscenes and moving for
30 minutes yeah you worked on the
tutorial the new tutorial I did I worked
on the new tutorials there are any
alignment there cuz like salutely
absolutely because I assume that yeah it
would be interesting to sort of see how
yeah one of the things I've learned
throughout many different things in
Tendo playing games is like players
first impression of a game dictates so
much and it's like you could play a game
for an hour and then like that's it
you're done and so coming out with a
really strong sort of like first
impression is really important so that
they'll keep playing the game
you know this where you see stats like
10 percent of players actually beat a
game and so yeah I took sort of that
knowledge when designing the new player
experience and worked with the team and
was sort of like okay well what do we
want to show we want to show what's
really fun about League of Legends in
like five minutes what's fun about
League of Legends using champions and
team fighting and so like that's what we
focused on and so in the new tutorial
you can actually like take portals and
switch between various champions and you
end up in a 5v5 teamfight like three
minutes in and like that's really
important to show what are moments where
you feel like you've had a great deal of
success here like a like I did this it
works like what what are those types of
moments look like for you pretty much
whenever we launch a product and it goes
well and you keep using it it's sort of
the big one
like a Nintendo shipping products but
specifically a riot like the mission
system was one I'm really proud of
because there was a lot of push to like
make it more complicated and have more
bells and whistles and it's like no keep
it simple players want to just like do a
mission get some stuff but then go back
to playing the game the core essence of
the game and upon shipping it that has
proven to be correct which is sort of a
gratifying like yeah I know what I'm
talking about which is kind of nice how
do you know when something has been like
you you release that stuff you want to
find out if it's good or bad or if the
players like it or not is that mostly
from like Twitter and reddit is it like
a data thing where you have like a data
guy come in and
like look a bunch of people are using
this like how do you figure out if like
you've succeeded so this is that's an
interesting question because I would say
a lot of riot is very much like those
two things like you described it's
either you go look at like reddit boards
Twitter or whatever or you do some data
insights you send out some survey for me
it's much less about that and it's more
like a Nintendo you sort of learn to
like play like a player but really what
I mean by that it's like you're not the
player most people who are game
developers are what you'd call like top
95 percentile they play tons of games
they think about all the time most
normal players are like I do this in my
spare time or play a few games a week
and so whenever we launch a product I
try to go and play that product as a
player and like with missions I've tried
to make sure I do every mission just to
make sure they work and so I go back and
like did that work did that feel good
yeah it did that's sort of a muscle you
have to develop over time to sort of
turn off what you want as a player and
more broadly what players will want yeah
it must be hard cuz you are like you
said it you are so different from the
majority of the player base in so many
ways right like you are thinking about
the stuff you've thought about the past
iterations of it you have all this
context for why you arrive at something
where's like when I feature drops it's
just suddenly a player who might not
have been playing league for the past
two months because they've been busy at
work they come and login and they're
like what is all this crap yeah
what was really good for flexing that
muscle was at Nintendo we called it the
thirty five-year-old mom test and what
we would do is we would be developing a
product and we would bring in some you
know person who normally didn't gain
that much and have them play the game
and it was very revealing the problems
they faced versus like someone who
understands all the game conventions of
games the problems they would face
because even with like the new tutorial
for example when we first started
developing that a lot of the people on
the team were like players aren't gonna
struggle with this stuff they get it
it's easy we brought in some like 13 to
15 year old kids who like don't PC game
and it was amazing watching like getting
them to just right click you know waz D
was pretty much the default so many
accidental heels and flashes
getting them to use abilities was
actually a really big struggle we
struggled for a while like how do we
call out like press Q this is a thing
you know like those are different
problems that you know when you see
suggestions for the tutorial people are
like Oh teach me how to auto cancel and
you're like no because you're and that's
also another point because the feet when
you go to like a Twitter or reddit the
people that are providing that feedback
are also really hardcore fans right like
a new player experiences like the
opposite of what you know those people
are gonna be exposed to yeah and that's
a real problem right because then you
get that feedback where it's like give
me all these tutorials that show me
proper jungle paths and like you get
where they're coming from and you get
that player need but that's just not the
goal of what you're trying to accomplish
when with the new player we're trying to
really get real new players to like
League of Legends actually it's funny
thinking about it you know and obviously
I tend to do eSports interviews like a
lot of the stuff you work on probably is
disregarded by a lot of the eSports
players right like yep doublelift
probably not the doesn't care so much
about like a bilge water or Ventura
correct correct and that's it's one of
those things that like you have to
remind yourself that like just because
it's not getting all the attention
doesn't mean it's not important I will
say one of the cooler moments was when a
froma tweeted out that he reached level
100 and this was only like a month and a
half after it launched because obviously
he plays a little more than I do
but that was cool that like a fro MOOC
aired and it was like that's neat felt
really good you have any advice for
people who want to get into game design
yeah play a lot of games is the one
you'll hear the most often but the thing
I'll add to that is don't just play the
games really try to understand how they
work and why they work the way they do
oftentimes you get a lot of people who
will focus on just like oh here's why
it's fun here's why it's not but really
get into the the weeds of like why did
they do that exact decision or even
challenge yourself if if I had to make
it better what would I do I know as a
kid growing up I would often read like
the strategy guides for games like Super
Nintendo games and 64 games but just
reading all that stuff and like looking
at the map layouts and things you really
get a sense of like the patterns of like
oh they always put the power up to these
hidden ways and you start to notice
the patterns of game development that
will help you moving forward yeah
and then finally anything that you feel
people who are interested in riot fans
of riot or or interested and even on the
design set of riot should know or would
be interested in knowing I mean the big
thing that I'll tell people that has
made me really happy with riot and I
would advise anyone who wants to come
here to think through is sort of like
riot is the kind of company that will
give you what you're willing to put into
it and so if you come here with your
a-game ready to do awesome stuff and
ready to put the work in to do that
awesome stuff you'll get to do it and
you'll have great satisfaction and
you'll get to ship a lot of stuff if you
come here sort of expecting an easy ride
then you won't really have a lot of
successes so if you're considering
coming here like definitely come here
ready to do awesome things and be really
passionate about it thank you so much
for sitting down with me today so yeah
no problem
Christian glad to be here thank you
you